Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
Oh. I didn't pay.
Can you pay here?
[laughs]
[machine whirring]
Oh. my gosh.
It took my card.
[laughs]
You might want
to go back. dude.
So today I'm getting filmed
about my job at CIA.
I know you-you were.
um. studying
about Afghanistan and--
[girl]
All the wars.
and you. um. were a spy.
[Maddox chuckles]
I worked with spies.
It's true.
[indistinct chatter]
I'll never feel like
an Afghanistan expert.
The war. it's so complex.
It's almost been cyclical with
our U.S. government as well.
[turn signal clicking]
What is the mission?
What is the goal there?
[car door closes]
♪ soft music ♪
And I got to know Afghans.
I worked with Afghans.
I'm a woman. a mother.
My heart hurts
for these people
because I just don't see
how this ends.
♪♪♪
After the extraordinary
sacrifice
of blood and treasure.
the American people are weary
of the longest war
in American history.
This year we will bring
America's longest war
to a responsible end.
I want the Afghan people
to understand--
America seeks an end to this
era of war and suffering.
[George W. Bush]
We know from the history
of military conflict
in Afghanistan.
it's been one
of initial success
followed by long years
of floundering
and ultimate failure.
We're not gonna repeat
that mistake.
We welcome the distinguished
interim leader
of a liberated Afghanistan.
Chairman Hamid Karzai.
[applause]
[Bill Clinton]
Osama bin Laden publicly vowed
to wage a terrorist war
against America
from Afghanistan.
This will be a long
ongoing struggle
between freedom
and fanaticism.
[George H.W. Bush] Our
commitment to the people there
would lead
to a peaceful Afghanistan
with no more bloodbaths.
[Reagan]
The goal of the United States
remains a genuinely
independent Afghanistan.
free from
external interference.
Massive Soviet military forces
have invaded
the small sovereign nation
of Afghanistan.
History teaches
that aggression unopposed
becomes a contagious disease.
♪♪♪
I grew up thinking Afghanistan
was the biggest country
in the world.
the most beautiful country
the most developed country
in the world.
with a huge passion
for my country
because it was very much
the same. uh. thing
my father shared.
♪♪♪
In a very romantic way.
my father was always talking
about the Afghanistan
that he had experienced.
They would go on the weekends
to restaurants.
They would take a walk
in the park.
But these were all those. uh.
fairy tales to us.
Mm. we never experienced
Afghanistan that way.
♪♪♪
One thing in common about many
of these fights in my country
is that. unfortunately.
it's our soil that is
being used for various wars
between the global powers.
♪♪♪
The world
simply cannot stand by
and permit the Soviet Union
to commit this act
with impunity.
[gunfire]
The Soviets killed about
ten percent of the population.
[camera shutter clicking]
It was a genocide.
and the military was not
doing anything about it.
but I heard
that. uh. the agency did.
[Bearden]
The CIA director says.
"I want you to go out there
and win this."
[Coll] I was the
Washington Post correspondent
in. uh. South Asia.
so the Afghan War
was pretty much
the biggest story on my beat.
Pakistan had
an immediate refugee flow.
They went to their ally.
the United States. and said.
"We've got all these rebels
who are coming into our country
as refugees.
They want to liberate
their country
from Soviet occupation.
We. the Pakistan government.
are inclined to help them.
but we could use
your support as well."
And so we were told
to get busy
and try to figure out
what was happening
with these guys
called the mujahideen.
[Sageman]
People knew that the CIA
was supporting the Afghans.
They could never know how.
[Schroen] So we then decided
we would use the Pakistanis
as our surrogates
to support the mujahideen.
[gunfire]
[man]
speaking native language
[Reagan] The Soviet presence
in Afghanistan
is a major impediment
to improved
U.S.-Soviet relations.
and we would like
to remove it.
[Schroen] We were putting in
a variety of weapons systems
into the hands
of the mujahideen.
The United States
started to provide
these Stinger
antiaircraft missiles
to equip the rebels to fight
the Soviets as equals.
They started knocking Soviet
aircraft out of the sky
by the hundreds.
[Bergen]
That changed the war.
and it showed that the
U.S. government was serious
about not just inflicting
some damage on the Soviets
but actually getting them
to leave Afghanistan.
which is what they did.
[Bearden] And as soon as
Boris Gromov rode on that tank
out to the middle
of Friendship Bridge
from Afghanistan.
I hit send on a cable
that was typed out using Xs
to make a big. "We won."
♪♪♪
I wrote an article
and put the name on it.
"Graveyard of Empires."
My point was. it's very easy
getting in there.
but getting out
is immensely difficult.
and winning is...
very. very questionable.
Whatever winning means.
you usually don't get it
in Afghanistan.
♪♪♪
[horns honking]
Kabul has changed a lot
in the last several years.
It used to be
that you could
kind of walk
around the streets
and pick up a cab
and go to a restaurant.
have a nice meal.
If you're a foreigner.
that's basically all gone.
♪♪♪
The Taliban have done
a campaign of attacking
anywhere Westerners gather.
and we're in an armored car
because it's regarded
as too dangerous now.
which is a pity because Kabul
is an amazingly beautiful
and vibrant city.
The city is now brimming
with up to six million people.
and it's a very different Kabul
than the one I remember
under the Taliban
or during the Civil War.
♪♪♪
The United States ended
its official presence
in Afghanistan today.
two weeks before
Soviet troops are scheduled
to complete their pullout.
Our State Department
correspondent
Bill Plante reports.
[Plante] A marine guard hauled
down the stars and stripes
at the U.S. embassy in Kabul
as the remaining handful
of diplomats
prepared to get out
of Afghanistan
as soon as weather permits.
The U.S. joins
other Western nations
which have temporarily
pulled out.
fearing chaos
after Soviet troops
end their ten-year occupation.
I first got
into. uh. Afghanistan
by crossing the-the frontier
between Pakistan
and Afghanistan
with a group of mujahideen
in mid-1989.
just as the Soviet Union
had. uh. withdrawn.
♪♪♪
I was working
with an aid agency.
trying to help
both with refugees in Pakistan
and inside Afghanistan.
People were readying
themselves for the fight
over who would claim
Afghanistan
now that the-the Soviets
had got out.
♪♪♪
America made a fatal mistake.
The Afghan thing was almost
totally forgotten.
The result was that
an Afghanistan
so overloaded with ordnance
and awash with money
slipped into its own devices.
[Coll] From a war
correspondent's perspective.
by the time
I was traveling around
in the war in the early '90s.
it had become
a nasty civil war.
[Constable]
The thing I remember most
was how lonely it was.
Kabul was like a ghost city.
You could stand
in a major intersection.
which now has endless
clogged traffic jams.
and see no one and hear nothing
but bicycle spokes
and horse carriage bells.
It was very haunting.
[man]
yelling in native language
[Constable] There was rape.
There was robbery.
Buildings were rocketed
and shot all the time.
People were terrified.
[Semple] Out of the fight.
street by street in Kabul.
replicated in the sort of
districts of the country.
we got the Taliban movement.
I can recall
the precise moment
in which I learnt
of the Taliban movement.
I was at a garden party.
and a posh Englishman
told me about this supposedly
Islamic student movement
which had just taken over a
swath of territory in Kandahar
and was chasing after these
money-grubbing. gun-wielding.
you know. commanders left over
from the mujahideen.
hanging them up
from trees and posts
and stuffing money
in their mouths.
and he told me.
"Michael. this looks
like the next big thing."
um. and he was right.
[Coll] The Taliban advertised
themselves
as a kind of purifying force.
a cleansing force
that would reunify Afghanistan
under the banner of Islam.
[Schroen] That was very
attractive to the Pakistanis.
They didn't want Afghanistan
to be a threat.
and so the Pakistani
government
threw their weight militarily
and financially
behind the Taliban.
and by early 1996.
they controlled three-fourths
of Afghanistan.
[Coll] They often conquered
without firing a shot.
They would just ride
into a town
holding Korans in the air
or waving the flags of. uh.
their movement or of Islam.
and whole garrisons
would just. uh. change sides.
[Constable]
The gratitude began to fade
and be replaced
with something else
when it became clear
that the Taliban wanted
to enforce an extremely
restrictive version of Islam.
I went to Afghanistan
as a journalist.
I think. five or six times.
and that meant that you had
to get a visa
from the Taliban government.
which meant that you were there
under very limited
and very strict conditions.
and there were many conditions.
Number one. you had
to completely cover yourself
except your face.
Number two.
you couldn't meet with women.
Number three. you couldn't
take pictures of anything.
I had a camera. a small camera.
hidden under
my voluminous scarf.
and we stopped at a bakery
to buy some bread.
and I saw this boy's face
through the window.
and I just ducked
into the bakery.
and I got out my camera.
and I just took this
one single picture of him.
and then I left.
♪♪♪
There was no music. no-no TV.
no phone system to speak of.
Women were locked
inside their houses.
Girls were not educated.
The economy totally collapsed.
♪♪♪
The deal was.
you get the right to life.
and you give up pretty much
all other rights.
♪♪♪
[Rahmani] This is the pictures
of all the ambassadors
that served here.
As you can see.
there are no women.
So here. I would come
as a shock factor.
but that's where
the change happens.
Starting '92.
I found the country
in the worst possible shape.
There was this. uh. ambience
of darkness and fear
and gloom.
♪♪♪
We have to wear burkas.
We never wore burkas
in my entire life.
I was a young teenager.
and I thought. "Why?
Why should I be like this?"
I told my family
that I am going to sew
the two big shawls
that we had
so that I will have
a very big sheet.
and I would fully
cover myself.
but I am not gonna
wear a burka.
It symbolized
so much oppression to me.
♪♪♪
In 2001.
there were 900.000 students
in school.
and the number of girls?
Zero.
We did not want our
generations to be illiterate.
So. if somebody knew math.
they would quietly tell
the neighborhood. uh.
boys and girls
that. "We will teach you math."
but that always had
to be hidden.
[Schroen] We said.
"When you guys are victorious
and the Soviets are gone.
we're finished.
We turn the country
over to you.
We're not here forever."
♪♪♪
When that happened.
we basically walked away.
♪♪♪
When the Taliban took over.
most people said.
"There's nothing
we can do about it.
so we're not gonna
do anything.
We're not even gonna
worry about it."
Our interest really was
when bin Laden went there.
rather than anything that's
gonna change Afghanistan.
♪♪♪
[Saleh]
I come from a rural family.
Uh. we were one
of the destitute families.
uh. due to war.
and. uh. when I became
able enough.
I went back to the valley.
and I joined. uh. the forces
fighting the regime.
[woman]
At the age of 19.
he was already
a seasoned war veteran
in charge
of rebuilding villages
bombed in the fighting.
[Saleh]
Couple of years later.
I was given
intelligence assignment.
So. since '97. I was assigned
to handle
the overall relationship
with the. uh--with the CIA.
The strategic aspect
of the relationship
was telling them
what is terrorism.
what is bin Laden.
what is al-Qaeda.
and what type of threat
does it pose
to U.S. interest
in the wider region
and how we should. uh. cope
with it.
Of course. they were not
very receptive
of our strategic analysis.
They were showing
very little interest
to the hosts of al-Qaeda.
They were showing
very. very little interest
to the plight
of the Afghan people.
who were suffering
under that terrorist regime.
♪♪♪
[Bergen] One thing Afghans
don't need a lot of help with
is fighting.
uh. and. uh--
but a number of Arabs.
like Osama bin Laden. came.
and they were very idealistic.
They weren't very large
in number.
They weren't
very military effective.
They didn't have
any fighting experience.
But they got together.
and he founded al-Qaeda
over the course
of a couple of weekends
in Pakistan
in August of 1988.
It was a very secretive
organization.
[Coll] They really didn't have
very many places to go.
and Afghanistan was one place
where bin Laden thought
he could establish
al-Qaeda's headquarters.
[Bergen] In '96. I read
a State Department report
about bin Laden
saying he's financing
Islamic extremism.
He's recruited all of these
Arabs from around the world.
and he could be a problem.
So I went to my bosses at CNN.
I said. "Let's try
and interview this guy."
You know. this is. like.
the hostage video.
Yeah.
The hostage video.
♪♪♪
There we are.
We look almost human.
speaking native language
No one really paid
any attention until 1998.
when al-Qaeda
blew up two American embassies
within nine minutes
of each other.
Two bombs exploded
almost simultaneously today
at the U.S. embassies
in the East Africa nations
of Kenya and Tanzania.
[woman] U.S. officials
say the bombings
have all the fingerprints
of Middle East terror.
[Bergen] That is when
it became clear
that bin Laden and al-Qaeda
was really a big deal
and could--
not only were spouting all
this anti-American rhetoric
but trying to kill. you know.
large numbers of Americans.
[Bill Clinton] There is
convincing information
from our
intelligence community
that the bin Laden
terrorist network
was responsible
for these bombings.
[Grenier] Bin Laden
was constantly moving.
and we were using
Afghan tribal networks
to report on his travels
and his whereabouts.
Our tribal contacts
came to us.
and they said. "Look.
he's in this location now.
When he leaves. he's gonna
have to go through
this particular crossroads."
and so what they proposed
was to bury
a huge cache of explosives
underneath those crossroads
so that when his convoy
came through.
they could simply blow it up.
And we said. "Absolutely not."
We were risking jail
if we didn't tell them that.
because the CIA
had a so-called lethal finding
that had been signed
by President Clinton
which said that
we could engage in
"lethal activity"
against bin Laden.
but the purpose
of our attack on bin Laden
couldn't be to kill him.
We were being asked
to remove this threat
to the United States
essentially with one hand
tied behind our backs.
[Martin]
I was a fairly junior officer.
and as al-Qaeda grew
into a worldwide presence.
we were very sensitive
and very aware
of this growing phenomenon.
It's not like
they were playing.
The threat was real.
And if President Clinton
had taken action
and killed Osama bin Laden.
there wouldn't
have been a 9/11.
If there wouldn't have been
a 9/11.
there wouldn't have been
Afghanistan.
If there wouldn't have been
there probably
wouldn't have been Iraq.
What would the world be like?
♪♪♪
[Maddox] It still gets to me.
living in our nation's capital
and every building
has significance...
...especially driving by here.
Something I'll never forget.
shaped my whole life.
♪♪♪
I had finished my first week
at Georgetown.
They have a National Security
Studies program there.
I was driving around
in the area.
getting used to it
after that first week.
and then a bunch of cars
stopped in front of me.
and people got out and started
screaming and pointing.
The plane had just hit
the Pentagon.
♪♪♪
When I came to D.C..
I actually didn't think
I would stay.
but counterterrorism
developed into an entire field
after that day.
and I got swept up in it.
♪♪♪
[Coll] On 9/11. it was clear
who the enemy was.
and the Bush administration
went straight into Afghanistan.
where al-Qaeda was.
where bin Laden was.
and tried to attack them.
both for the purpose
of responding to 9/11
but also to try to disrupt
any planning
that al-Qaeda
might have under way
for a follow-on attack.
[man] The Taliban
have now made it clear
that they will not bow
to American pressure.
At a chaotic press conference
at their embassy in Islamabad.
they threatened holy war
if attacked
and rejected
President Bush's demand
to surrender Osama bin Laden.
Are you willing to hand
Osama bin Laden
to the United States or not?
No. no. no. no.
[Mohseni]
Well. for the Taliban.
there was an opportunity
for them to distance.
uh. the movement from these
groups and individuals.
and we were hoping
they wouldn't.
because. uh. for us.
it was an opportunity
to actually rid Afghanistan
of the Taliban.
And as we expected.
they stuck to their guns.
and they did not
in any way compromise.
and that was the beginning
of the end for them.
at least in that period.
[Schroen] When 9/11 happened.
they called me in.
Basically. they said. "Will you
take the first team in?
We got to--we want to put
a team together."
I said. "Oh. God.
everybody in the United States
wants to do this.
and they're giving me the job.
be the first people
to hit back at bin Laden?"
I said. "Yeah.
better believe it."
[Bernsten] When I entered.
you know. I had my orders.
I had an operational directive
to execute on the ground.
Number one. destroy the Taliban
because they're in the way.
We have to get at al-Qaeda.
Number two.
kill every member of al-Qaeda
that you can find
on the battlefield.
Number three.
find and kill bin Laden.
♪♪♪
[Schroen]
Well. when we left.
chief of
Counterterrorism Center said--
We met him on the morning
we were getting ready to leave.
and he said. "I'm gonna
give you your orders now.
Once the Northern Alliance
is ready
and they go into Kabul.
we want you and your team
to go in with them
and capture bin Laden
and his lieutenants.
Then what I want you to do is.
when you capture those guys.
I want you to cut
their heads off.
and the lieutenants. I want you
to put their heads on pikes
and display them
and photograph them.
and bin Laden.
I want you to take his head
and put it on dry ice
in a box and ship it back.
so I'm gonna take it
to the president to see."
So I look at the deputy.
He looks at me.
and I-I'm saying.
"Is this guy serious?"
I said. "Okay. maybe we could
cut off their heads.
Maybe. I don't know."
I said. "I doubt it.
but maybe we could."
I said. "And we can certainly
make pikes out in the field.
You know. that's not hard."
I said. "But where
am I gonna find dry ice
in Afghanistan?"
♪♪♪
[Coll]
Vice President Cheney
said fairly soon
after the attacks.
"We're gonna go over
to the dark side."
And. historically.
when presidents have wanted
to go over to the dark side.
they've asked the CIA to do it.
[Cheney] A lot of what needs
to be done here
will have to be done quietly
without any discussion.
using sources and methods. uh.
that are available
to our intelligence agencies.
[Gossman] The first trip
I took was in 1994.
Human Rights Watch.
The war had continued.
The Soviets had gone.
but the war was continuing.
which was sort of--
came to be the story
over the many years
I went to Afghanistan.
Despite whatever
political changes happened.
the war almost had a life
of its own and continued.
The first boots on the ground
after 9/11 were the CIA.
and very quickly.
they began working with
and bolstering militia groups
to work with.
and those groups
were designed.
recruited. and trained
to go after leading al-Qaeda
or Taliban figures.
[Coll] The CIA was transformed
as an institution by 9/11.
Out of that came
the. uh. structure
that is now notorious...
the black sites. the enhanced
interrogation techniques.
the waterboarding.
and the rest.
When I joined
the agency in the 1980s.
only the bad guys
used those techniques on us.
Unlike the FBI.
the agency really did not have
any skill in interrogation.
especially
hostile interrogation.
That was something new.
[Martin]
I can honestly say
I know what attacks
were stopped.
I know how hard
the folks worked.
and I also know
they weren't emotional.
People weren't having fun
waterboarding people.
[Maddox]
I would never say
that I am in support
of torture
or anything in that regard.
but there was definitely
a push technically
and in human intelligence
to get as much information
as possible.
and you have
to put yourself back
in that particular time
in history.
When I think about...
when I think about the kids
and the-and the-and the-
and the women and children
and good Americans
who are still alive
because of what we did.
you know what I say?
I say. "Fuck history.
Fuck history."
As far as that program.
I slept good at night.
[Gossman]
I did a briefing on it
for all the ambassadors
in Kabul.
and I had said
that the torture
that had been described
by people who had investigated
the secret detentions.
the salt pit. the case
of people being left out.
dying of hypothermia.
and the rest of it.
these kinds of torture
and secret detentions
had been known
in the Soviet times.
It was shocking for them
to be coming up again
in post-2001 Afghanistan.
The Americans didn't
come to the briefing.
but they came
immediately afterwards
and wanted to see me.
When I was approached
by one of them.
he was so angry.
he was shaking.
The very fact I dared
compare those abuses
to what had happened
with the Soviets
had infuriated him.
and I'm just like--
that's what infuriated him.
not the fact
that they happened
but that I had made
a comparison with the Soviets.
The way the-that war
has been fought.
the counterterrorism war.
it's largely shaped
where we are today.
It was always the CIA's war.
It was in the '80s. the '90s.
and it was after 2001.
♪♪♪
[Bernsten] We enter Kabul.
It's 12 November.
I know bin Laden's fled.
Watch bin Laden move south.
which was down to Tora Bora.
and then pursued right away.
Tora Bora is a very remote
mountainous part of Afghanistan
on the border with Pakistan.
It's an area
that he knew very well.
He'd been going through
that area during the '80s.
fighting the Soviets.
It's an area--
he liked being there.
He. uh--he had. like.
a vacation home there.
which wouldn't be my
first choice of vacation spot.
[Bernsten]
We knew that bin Laden
was moving with a group
of about 1.000 people.
Right away they said. "Okay.
we're gonna go pursue him."
I said. "Do it. Send them in."
We go up.
They get up on top
of a promontory mountain piece.
and then down below.
there's bin Laden
and his huge element.
Our team had a SOFLAM.
Special Operations Forces
Laser Acquisition Mechanism.
which allowed them to target
and do 56 hours of air strikes
and just hammer them.
We bombed the bejesus
out of the place.
[Bernsten] We destroyed
most of their gear.
their radios. their vehicles.
They had tanks.
They had all sorts of stuff.
They were trying
to get up into position.
We wrecked it all on the ground
before they could get up there
and killed a bunch of them.
Bin Laden wrote his will
at Tora Bora.
He thought he was gonna die.
He thought this was the end.
♪♪♪
But it wasn't.
[Bernsten] So. after our guys
go up. do the bombing.
the initial bombing.
that first four guys come out.
and one of those guys had been
a former Delta Force guy.
have him brought right back.
He's the one
that says to me. "Gary.
we are going to need
U.S. forces."
♪♪♪
[Bergen]
The CIA requested 800 Rangers.
but that request was
turned down by the U.S. Army.
♪♪♪
What Gary Brunson
was arguing for. I think.
were very large numbers
of troops. uh.
to go into the valleys.
and. frankly. I-I thought that
much of what he was advocating
at the time
was not gonna be effective.
Gary probably had a little bit
more enthusiasm than judgment.
♪♪♪
That's bullshit.
They weren't accustomed
to having to make decisions
as rapidly as I was forcing
because I knew the enemy
was going to escape.
I didn't have a choice.
♪♪♪
On the 16th of December.
bin Laden and his-his-his guys
left the mountains.
♪♪♪
They just walked across
into Pakistan.
They got on motorcycles
and just headed out.
and it took us all those years
later before we found him.
♪♪♪
We were building the country.
We were training
the Afghan military.
We were paying
for building of facilities
with the U.S. military.
We had turned it over
to State Department and say.
"Okay.
now you build a new nation.
You teach them democracy.
how do they handle elections.
Do all that stuff."
[Rahmani]
As things progressed.
it was a dream come true.
and it was hard to believe
that we had got
a second chance to live.
♪♪♪
That was when I really
explored the country.
That was when I started
not only to travel
to every corner of Kabul
but also to over 15 provinces.
It was a utopia.
[Barker] My first trip
over to Afghanistan
was in January of 2002.
There's a reason that most
of the. like. correspondents
that came up
during that time were women.
Men had a very hard time.
particularly
in the early days.
doing stories about women.
and women were
a fascinating story
and an important story
in Afghanistan.
[Waldman] My first stories
in Afghanistan
were about what life
had been like
for the women under the Taliban
because they were finally able
to speak freely.
♪♪♪
There were women
who had been forcibly married
to the Taliban.
There were teachers
and doctors and young women
who had grown up
during those five years
of not being free at all.
[Barker] As people finally had
access to the outside world.
the culture was changing
before our very eyes.
♪♪♪
[Mohseni] I left Afghanistan
when I was 12.
I had not been to the country
for a very long time.
But the need to come back. uh.
was very strong
for not just me
but for a lot of other Afghans.
I was a banker.
and my brother was a lawyer.
and the other brother
was a finance person.
and our sister
was a marketing person.
And in 2002.
we secured
the first private license
for a radio station.
[laughter on radio]
[woman]
speaking native language
[laughter]
[indistinct chatter on radio]
♪♪♪
[Mohseni] It was about music.
It was about jokes.
It was men and women
just having a conversation.
♪♪♪
But it's ironic that...
how many people
are enemies of fun.
The conservatives at the time.
they were very suspicious.
We're a bunch of young people
in this house. basically.
no security whatsoever.
and people would literally
knock on our doors and say.
"We hate you guys."
But so the radio
was a success.
and we thought
the natural progression
would be to launch
a television station.
[man]
speaking native language
[Mohseni] We saw the good news
on day one.
and we came up
with all sorts of programs
that we could produce quickly.
[applause]
And then we started
to do really big stuff.
like the Idol  format
with Afghan Star.
♪ upbeat rock music ♪
singing in native language
speaking native language
[Mohseni]
When we first launched.
this whole idea
of voting for a winner.
they couldn't believe that we
would stick to our principles
in terms of. like. counting
people's text messages.
But what was extraordinary
was how quickly
people accepted it.
[cheers and applause]
That's what's interesting
with the media.
We just give people sort of
a glimpse of what's possible.
[woman]
This weekend in Afghanistan.
the voice of the people
was finally heard.
[woman] Precious ballots
from Afghanistan's
only presidential
election in 5.000 years
poured into counting centers
around the country.
[indistinct chatter]
[Bergen] There hasn't been
a presidential election
in the United States
since 1900 where 70 percent
of the population
able to vote voted.
♪ soft music ♪
[Constable] I went
to villages and schools
where people were voting.
and the feeling in those rooms
was one of pride and hope
and belief that things
were getting better
and that the system
that was being created
would help the country.
[applause]
[Karzai] The Afghan people.
by coming out and voting.
have given the last
defeat to terrorism.
[Cheney]
The tyranny is gone.
the terrorist enemy
is scattered.
and the people
of Afghanistan are free.
[Schroen] I thought.
"If things keep on like this.
we can win this
in a couple of years."
♪♪♪
[McRaven]
All the books you see here
are about
special operations missions.
and they don't always go well.
Uh. you know. when I think
about Desert One.
it didn't go well.
When I think about
a lot of these. uh. books
that are here
on World War II missions.
they didn't go well.
So I actually drew
on a lot of the lessons
because I wanted to make sure
whatever plan
that I constructed for
the mission took into account.
you know. the successes
and why we were successful
and-and. frankly. the failures
and how we avoid
those failures.
I was sent overseas to run
the Special Operations
Task Force in Afghanistan.
and from a military
standpoint.
Afghanistan appeared to be
kind of in a caretaker status.
Please.
We clearly have moved
to a period of stability
and stabilization
and reconstruction.
[McRaven] So we shifted
our focus in 2003
as we began
the invasion of Iraq.
[mortar fires]
- [man] Jesus!
- [man 2] Whoo!
[Martin]
Big tanks. big toys.
that was the new war.
and our allies
became confused at.
what were
our real objectives?
We will stay on task until
we've achieved our objective.
which is to rid Iraq
of weapons of mass destruction.
"What?
They haven't hurt you.
Saddam hasn't hurt you.
He doesn't like al-Qaeda.
There's not al-Qaeda in Iraq."
[man]
Whoa!
[Grenier] I was called
into a meeting
with the CIA director.
and he told me
that he wanted me
to head up the CIA effort
in Iraq.
And the most. uh.
experienced senior officers
who were in a position.
you know. to deal
at a political level. uh.
very quickly left. uh.
the Afghan theater.
We're worried about terrorism.
and next thing. we wake up.
and-and resources are gone.
♪ dramatic music ♪
[Kilcullen] When I was
in the State Department
Counterterrorism Bureau.
the most important resource
that was in short supply
was policy-maker attention.
and I said.
"We actually have to focus
on local-level governance.
reforming the Afghan
corruption system.
and giving the Afghan military
a series of really basic
capabilities."
because by that point. we were
so sucked into the war in Iraq
that we just didn't have
the bandwidth to deal with it.
[man]
yelling in native language
[Kilcullen]
And the Taliban in Pakistan
and their cell groups
in Afghanistan
began to exploit that.
♪♪♪
I. uh. was involved
in some of the early.
early stages of talking
with the Taliban
about how to ensure that they
didn't join an insurgency.
They actually found
some way of reconciling
with the new regime.
I mean. it happened. like.
in my sitting room
in. you know. the house
in Islamabad. um.
you know. friendly discussions.
[men]
speaking native language
[Semple] My ability
to talk with Taliban today
is based upon actions
which I have taken every day
since I crossed
over the border in '89.
They can check my reputation.
work out how discreet I am.
and reckon
if I am duplicitous.
and I'm sort of. like.
doing the same
when I'm talking with them.
because. um.
one w-one way or another.
both sides of the relationship
have got to trust each other
to be able to-to go forward.
♪♪♪
In the wake of 9/11.
the Taliban leadership
wanted surrender terms
to live respectably
in their homes.
recognizing the authority
of the new government
which had been imposed
by the Americans.
Those terms were available.
They were torn up.
Instead we got increasingly
stories of Taliban
who'd tried to go home to
their villages in Afghanistan
either getting arrested
or giving up.
crossing the border.
going over to-to Pakistan
ready for the next chapter.
♪♪♪
The Taliban start to reform
the organization. uh.
saying that. "We have been
excluded from this new setup.
We're gonna have
another go."
[man]
Tonight  Frontline  reports
on the return of the Taliban.
[gunfire]
♪♪♪
There's some. uh.
ICOM chatter saying
that the Taliban
are looking at us right now.
[alarm blaring]
♪ somber music ♪
♪♪♪
[man]
speaking native language
♪♪♪
[Waldman]
For Americans.
the original story
of this long war
was we were saviors.
♪♪♪
We had gone in
and done a good thing...
and people were ecstatic
to be free again.
But the reality is.
I don't think
it was ever as clean
as we wanted to believe.
♪♪♪
[Barker] The first inflection
point that I noticed
happened in May 2006
when a U.S. military convoy
crashed into a crowd of people.
and they killed
about 14 people.
[crowd yelling]
♪♪♪
[gunfire]
speaking native language
♪♪♪
[crowd yelling]
[Constable]
People in these crowds
were shouting
angry anti-American slogans.
and I went. "What?
What has happened here?"
♪♪♪
That was the first time
I realized
that there was
as much resentment
against
the international presence
as there was
gratitude or hope.
♪♪♪
[Barker] There was
this building resentment
that Afghans had
against corruption
and civilian casualties.
and both of those could be
tied directly back to America.
We were pouring in
so much money
that corruption
was all but inevitable
with no checks and balances.
and then
with civilian casualties.
let's just say any
civilian casualty in general.
the Taliban
would immediately put out
press releases locally
saying.
"This is America
doing this to you."
They'd make up things.
and it was very effective.
[crowd yelling]
[gunfire]
[woman] Well. today's riots
showing just how fragile
our relationship is
with Afghanistan.
a key player
in the War on Terror.
Now. is it just a small group
of troublemakers at work here.
or are the Afghan people
simply ungrateful?
♪♪♪
[Constable] Afghans have
this streak of defiance
against the world
because of history.
There was the Russians
and the fact
that the Americans had
abandoned Afghanistan before.
There's always in the back
of the minds of Afghans
that-that suspicion
of ulterior motives.
♪♪♪
[Saleh]
United States got distracted.
and they wanted to show
that Afghanistan was still
this good story working
and it is rosy.
and they were not...
they were not listening
to us. you know?
♪♪♪
[Grenier]
I had great misgivings
because I felt that the CIA
needed to stay engaged
with key political players
inside Afghanistan.
but I could see very quickly
that there was very little
appetite. uh. for doing that.
It's not that we didn't know
Afghanistan
was going badly after that.
We did. but we couldn't
do anything about it.
because by the time
Iraq started to go bad.
Afghanistan
was also going bad.
and we were caught in a war
in two fronts
without the resources
to deal with both.
♪♪♪
[George W. Bush] America's
men and women in uniform
took away al-Qaeda's safe haven
in Afghanistan.
and we will not allow them
to reestablish it in Iraq.
So I have committed
more than 20.000
additional American troops
to Iraq.
The agreement
lays out a framework
for the withdrawal
of American forces in Iraq.
a withdrawal that is possible
because of the success
of the surge.
[man]
yelling in foreign language
[man] While Iraq has dominated
the headlines.
the less-publicized fight
in Afghanistan
has intensified.
[Obama] My fellow citizens.
our nation is at war
against a far-reaching network
of violence and hatred.
and for those who seek
to advance their aims
by inducing terror
and slaughtering innocents.
you cannot outlast us.
and we will defeat you.
[cheers and applause]
For six years.
Afghanistan has been denied
the resources that it demands
because of the war in Iraq.
It is in our vital
national interest
to send an additional 30.000
U.S. troops to Afghanistan.
Well. I think
that in the last year.
we've made a lot of progress.
[Petraeus] Two thousand ten
will be a year
that will see progress
and a reversal
of Taliban momentum.
[woman] Well. the financial
and human cost
of the War in Afghanistan
has gone up every year
over the past five years.
more than 1.600 U.S. troops.
This past year in Afghanistan
was the deadliest yet
for American troops.
[Petraeus] Momentum achieved
by the Taliban in Afghanistan
since 2005 has been arrested
in much of the country.
I wish I could tell you
that this war was simple.
but that's not the way
of counterinsurgencies.
They are fraught with both
successes and setbacks.
which can exist
in the same space
and in the same time.
and I believe
the campaign is on track.
♪♪♪
[Coll] If you ask the
question. "Why are we here?"
as President Obama did when
he came into office in 2009.
"Why are we fighting
in Afghanistan?"
well. his best experts
gathered and advised him.
"Sir. we're here
because al-Qaeda
is still a threat
to the United States.
Bin Laden's still alive.
We got to finish the job."
[McRaven] Every year.
there was this sense
that if we did X. Y. and Z.
maybe we could finish up
the war.
[Obama] Tonight I can report
to the American people
and to the world
that the United States
has conducted an operation
that killed Osama bin Laden.
the leader of al-Qaeda.
[McRaven]
And this will go down
as one of the great missions
in the history
of the intelligence community.
As I was planning the mission.
you had to have surprise.
We had surprise.
You had to have speed.
We're coming in by helicopters.
And you had to have purpose.
and God knows these-these. uh.
SEALs and soldiers had purpose.
They were going after the most
wanted man in the world.
It was about
who we are as Americans.
This man and his people
had attacked New York
and Pennsylvania
and Washington. D.C..
and we had an obligation
to spend as long as it took
to bring him to justice.
♪♪♪
[Coll]
We did get bin Laden.
Al-Qaeda is diminished.
It's scattered.
It's under pressure.
We have been killing people
with our drones
for a good while now.
so why are we still here?
♪♪♪
[engine whirring]
As the war in Afghanistan
went on and on.
the CIA then got into
the secret air war business.
which is really what
the drone campaign was.
It was a secret air war
designed to do
what the United States
was not prepared to do
through conventional means.
The CIA was given
charge of that
because it wasn't
going to be declared.
It wasn't going to be run
by the Air Force
or by the special operations
groups at the Pentagon.
It was. uh. covert.
and so that added to the sense
that the CIA was--
became an agency at war.
[Bergen]
It's a new way of war.
The United States government
wouldn't even acknowledge
this was really happening.
and-and when they did
acknowledge it.
privately they would say.
"There's
no civilian casualties."
Well. that wasn't true.
[man]
In Afghanistan.
NATO is investing
a U.S. air strike on Thursday
that may have killed a child
in Helmand Province.
[Raddatz] Whatever the
benefit of the drone strikes.
they have created
enormous resentment
among some here in the region
who view the strikes as another
sign of American arrogance.
[Bergen] And you can see.
this is by administration.
so under George W. Bush.
there were
relatively limited strikes
except right at the end
of his second term.
Then under Obama.
it spikes up hugely.
So it was really
President Obama
who hammed it up
very dramatically.
You can see the estimated
total number of casualties
is up to almost as high
as 3.000
on the outer bounds.
Myself and my colleagues
at New America
have been doing this
for about a decade.
We felt that there was
some data out there.
print media stories that we
could assemble and sort of say.
"What's going on?
Who's being killed?
How many strikes are there?"
And so we-we began
to kind of collate all this.
[Martin] When it came
to the Predator.
we also had our forces
somewhere in the area.
So there would be a shot.
and then people
were gonna move in
to do the sensitive site
collection.
and then--
so. you know. it was very human
because you knew
who were down there.
[Bergen] Afghanistan. I think.
was the early laboratory
of what this more
paramilitary CIA became.
so a drone program that went
from surveillance drones
to actually killing people.
I would say. actually.
the principal reason the CIA
is in Afghanistan is.
in a way. the drone program.
because after 9/11. al-Qaeda
didn't remain in Afghanistan.
They fled into Pakistan. uh.
and the Taliban
regrouped there.
[Martin] If I'm trying
to deploy six or 12 men
trying to climb up a mountain
and get this guy
when I can do this easier
and save our men
and women's lives and--
I'll go--I'll take the Predator
any day. any day.
♪♪♪
[Constable] In the early years
and really even through.
I would say.
for the first ten years.
you could travel anywhere.
The capital was lively.
The capital felt free.
Girls were going to school.
Girls were going to college.
It certainly felt like a place
that was churning with change.
♪♪♪
[Musazai] My father told me
about American University.
and he said. "It's the best
university in Afghanistan."
He always wanted me
to-to get education...
...so I joined the university.
[Sedney]
The vision for people here
is not a sixth-century
fundamentalist Islamic state.
It's a 21st-century
advanced country.
and they want to get there.
♪♪♪
We can play a role in that.
in helping them
achieve their dreams.
My father never want me
to come to this university
because of the risks involved
with the name "American" on it.
and seeing the situation.
how badly the war is going on
in Afghanistan.
he never wanted me
to come here.
But I told him
I have goals in my life.
and I've already did good
in my high school.
and I had passion
to get an education.
[Musazai] I was not worried
about security.
I had heard
about explosions on news.
but I had not experienced
something like that.
[Constable] As the Taliban
insurgency became stronger.
there was this growing
pattern of attacks
that began to make
everybody realize
that the Taliban
really were back
and really were causing trouble
and really were starting
to put the brakes
on progress of different kinds.
Many evenings.
I would go to my favorite bar.
this Lebanese café.
and I used to go there
probably at least once a week
for many. many years.
When you live
and work in a war zone.
you need a place like that.
You need someplace you can go
and really feel yourself.
be yourself.
and that's pretty much
the only place I felt that way.
And then the Taliban
attacked that café.
shot dead everyone in it.
including the owner.
[woman] The scenes
of this restaurant
are really quite incredible--
people crouched
on top of one-one-one another.
underneath tables.
gunned down inside there.
So that seems to have been
what has happened.
Anybody who was injured
seems to have been likely
to have been outside
the restaurant.
potentially in cars
waiting outside
or about to enter
the restaurant.
Anybody inside seems unlikely
to have been able
to escape easily
from the gunmen.
That's the moment
I sort of thought.
"What's left here. you know?
Why are we even here?"
I remember feeling it.
I remember thinking that.
♪♪♪
[Maddox] When I had
a temporary assignment
in Afghanistan.
I could electrically feel
the dangers around me.
There we go.
I've definitely known
people that have died.
- You want milk?
- No.
[Maddox. voice breaking]
The night before I left.
I was sitting
with my younger daughter.
and she gave me this bracelet
that she made.
and I promised her
I'd wear it every day
and every night
that I was away. and I did.
[sighs]
I never took it off.
And when I would leave the wire
or go to the less safe
or secure
and fortified areas...
I looked down at that bracelet.
and I would definitely question
what I was doing.
"Am I a responsible mom?
Does my work here
really make a difference
in this seemingly endless war?"
♪♪♪
I managed analytic teams
that covered Afghan politics
and Afghan economics.
At that time. there was
a U.S.-military narrative
that things were getting better
in the country
and that the Taliban
was failing.
and that was leading to
the discussions of drawdown.
[Obama]
Two thousand fourteen.
we have agreed
that this is the year
we will conclude our
combat mission in Afghanistan.
But things on the ground
were evolving
and telling a little bit
of a different story.
The 2015 takeover of Kunduz.
that's the first
provincial capital
the Taliban had taken
since before 2001.
It was a big deal.
[mortar fires]
[man]
The battle for Kunduz
started before dawn.
as Afghan government troops
tried in vain
to hold back the advance
of the Taliban.
After the West's
trillion-dollar war
against the Taliban.
its fighters still pose
a potent threat.
[Maddox] They took over
the city for about two weeks.
They released
a lot of prisoners--
a lot of them
were Taliban fighters--
and displaced
tens of thousands of people
in the process.
It was a total propaganda win
for them.
[translator] God willing.
this is our hope.
to build a religious school.
to build a bridge. a road.
a sharia-based government.
This is why we came out.
and this is what
we fought for--
so that sharia law
is enforced here.
Just holding the city--
that's all they needed to do
was just take it and hold it.
show of force
to show their fighters
and the world
that they were there
and still capable--
was quite significant.
♪♪♪
[Gossman] What happened in
Kunduz caught people off guard
when the Taliban
actually managed
to gain control of the city.
and I think what happened then
was a kind of panic.
The psychological blow
and the PR repercussions
of having lost
a very important northern city
were enormous.
and so then there was a kind of
real scrambling
to-to regain control.
and the American military
made a really horrific error.
[man]
Breaking news overnight--
U.S. warplanes may have
killed nine local staffers
at a medical clinic
run by Doctors Without Borders.
The attack was in
the provincial city of Kunduz.
The U.S. apparently was trying
to dislodge Taliban insurgents
who had seized the city
on Monday.
[Gossman] An American gunship
targeted the hospital
and circled it
and hit it repeatedly.
What's concerning. maybe.
about how it unfolded
was that the Afghan forces
operating there
had raided the hospital
some point previously.
looking for wounded Taliban.
and were apparently
quite unhappy with the fact
that MSF treated wounded
Taliban in the facility.
whereas MSF.
like any medical-care provider.
say that they treat anyone.
regardless
of political affiliation.
[man]
Our staff have reported
that there were
no armed combatants
or active fighting in
or from the compound
prior to the air strike.
[translator]
Doctors were about to take me
to an operating theater
when the bomb hit.
There were flames
all around me.
I saw patients and doctors
burn to death.
♪♪♪
[Gossman]
Forty-three people died.
quite a number of them
staff and patients...
including patients on the
operating table at the time.
including children.
I mean. it was just horrific.
♪♪♪
And some of these forces
that have carried out
these raids
on medical facilities
are the ones we identified
as being backed by.
trained. recruited
by the American CIA.
♪♪♪
That hospital bombing
after the siege of Kunduz
was pretty devastating.
A lot of innocent civilians
were killed.
and war is war.
and you can always say that.
but when innocent lives
are lost.
it really does make it
difficult to continue the work.
I saw a lot
of horrific images.
and it's hard
to deal with that
and learn how to process that.
but I learned
and found a way to...
store those images
and those experiences in my
heart without it destroying me.
You wake up in the morning.
and you brush it off.
and there's always an emergency
and something pressing
that's happening.
and you don't have time
to necessarily process
during the day.
so you just...you just go
150 miles per hour.
You go until you crash again.
[Sedney]
It was seven o'clock at night
when the most number
of students and faculty
and staff were here.
and it was just
when people were going
to their last class of the day.
The attackers loose off
a couple of volleys.
One of them goes this way
and heads
towards our escape route.
Another one goes in here
to our main classroom building.
At that time.
this-these doors were open.
We didn't have the-the heavy
doors we have on them now.
It was. uh.
the month of August
in 2016.
and I was expecting
that it's my last semester.
I was done with my classes.
and I went to offer
the evening prayer.
and we were about
to leave the mosque.
I heard some people shouting.
My friend immediately
closed the door.
and she said--
she-she calls me Bresh--
and she said. "Bresh.
why is there gunshots?"
As she said that...
♪♪♪
...the explosion happened.
and everything went dark.
[Qasemi]
I saw myself on the ground
after a couple
of minutes there.
and I realized
that there was a huge.
um. hole
in the back of my head.
American University campus
in Kabul. Afghanistan.
is under attack as we speak.
At least one university guard
is now dead.
Officials say that dozens
of students and staff
are still trapped inside.
their fate unknown.
[Musazai] Everybody was crying
and screaming.
The terrorists said.
"Don't scream." you know?
And then they started shooting.
♪♪♪
I felt that somebody's
standing behind me.
and when I looked at him.
he shot me.
and I pretended to be dead
because I thought this is
the only way to...
to save myself.
♪♪♪
[Qasemi]
I was bleeding so badly.
I was trying to remember
what's happening
at the university.
and I remember
what my father told me.
He said I can't come here.
and I regretted. um. to have
not accepted what he told me.
♪♪♪
I thought. um.
"It's a-it's a dream."
I wanted to wake up.
but then I realized
it's not a dream.
It's reality.
[indistinct chatter]
♪♪♪
This university has educated
more than 100
top government officials.
young people.
Afghanistan
is a very young country.
where 75 percent
of its population
is below the age of 25.
so the attack against
the American University
is an attack
against Afghanistan's future.
♪♪♪
We're numb to so many things
in Afghanistan.
I mean. someone
described PTSD to me.
and I think
that as Afghans-as Afghans.
we collectively suffer from it.
♪♪♪
[siren wailing]
[man] Unsafe now are
Afghanistan's journalists.
A bus carrying TOLO TV
employees was the target.
[Mohseni] We have lost
13 colleagues in three years.
and they were kids
that we employed.
and they were members
of our family.
♪♪♪
It's not just a question
of these young kids
leaving us far too early.
It's also their families.
Sometimes they were
the breadwinners
of an entire clan.
♪♪♪
It brings home how serious.
you know. what we do is and...
and how dangerous it is.
and. you know.
we've created this culture
of telling the truth.
of pushing boundaries.
so there's an element of guilt
that we have exposed
these people.
[man] The Taliban
said it meant
to target the journalists.
that the channel had accused
their fighters of raping women
when they briefly seized
the city of Kunduz last year.
You think it through. and then
you think. you seriously think.
"Do we need to do this?
Is it that important?
If we can save a life.
is it worth having
a news outlet?"
♪♪♪
For the Taliban.
their ideology
is so important for them.
and the values that we push.
whether it's women's rights
and so forth.
goes very much against
what they believe in.
But also. I think that we
represent the new Afghanistan
because the country
has moved on.
and for them.
it's difficult to accept that.
[Semple] I take some hope
from the fact that now Afghans
on both sides of the conflict.
they're incredibly tired
of this war.
They're not baying for blood.
They want to see an end to it.
With people I trust
amongst the Taliban.
we're involved in a collective
effort to make sense
about what's going on
inside their own movement.
about what's going on in Kabul
and amongst the-the--
you know.
the non-Taliban Afghans.
and making sense of what
the United States is doing.
speaking native language
United States
had a very difficult time.
almost from the beginning
of the Afghan War.
deciding whether the Taliban
was an enemy
of the United States.
Are they a threat
to the United States?
Well. they're a threat
to our ally in Afghanistan.
but no Taliban. uh.
has declared an intention
to strike the United States.
certainly not
in an official way.
In fact.
they say the opposite--
"We're only fighting you
because you're here
in our country.
If you get out of our country.
we'll leave you alone."
[Schroen]
Right now the Taliban.
they don't like ISIS
any more than we do.
so there's a war
going on there
while the Taliban still
blow up people in-in Kabul
and around the country.
[Martin]
I do think. at this point.
the Taliban may have learned
their lesson
about harboring al-Qaeda.
Now. why they're
after Americans now?
Because they're in Afghanistan.
We're there.
And for the Taliban and for-
for Afghanistan in general.
the way to communicate is.
you hurt them till they leave.
They did it to the Russians.
you know.
and-and they're doing it to us.
[man] An American soldier
is dead tonight
after a Taliban car bomb
exploded
in Kabul. Afghanistan.
Ten civilians and
a military soldier from Romania
also killed in that attack.
which comes as the U.S.
tries to finalize a peace deal.
[Waldman]
I'm really interested
in that whole incident.
partly because there was
a video someone took
right when it happened.
and there's an Afghan man who--
I think he sees
the truck or van
kind of coming on
to the sidewalk.
and you can see he knows.
and he starts to run.
and then he dies
when it blows up.
That video went really viral.
and it was such a sad story
'cause it was--
I think he was a shopkeeper.
and he usually sent
his assistant to do something
but decided that day
to give his assistant a break
and he would go do it.
I can't remember
the exact story.
but something about that moment
and people seeing him
kind of know what's coming
and try to escape.
I think every Afghan
saw themselves in that.
and that's why people
just kept watching it
over and over and over.
but that is what life
has become. you know?
You're just waiting
or hoping you can outrun
whatever's coming.
♪♪♪
[Trump] We're like policemen.
We're not fighting a war.
If we wanted to fight a war
in Afghanistan and win it.
I could win that war in a week.
I just don't want to kill
ten million people.
Does that make sense to you?
I don't want to kill
ten million people.
I have plans on Afghanistan
that if I wanted
to win that war.
Afghanistan would be wiped
off the face of the Earth.
It would be gone.
It would be over in--
literally in ten days.
and I don't want to do--
I don't want to go that route.
United States
does not owe us anything.
They can pull out
any second they wish.
but what will be
the interpretation
of this pullout?
There will be.
whether you like it or not.
a domino effect.
This will be celebration
for terrorists.
The mightiest power
in the globe running away.
leaving the scene to who?
I'm not saying they must stay.
I mean. they-they can leave
any moment they wish.
[Maddox] Seeing what
we've seen in Afghanistan
and our involvement in it.
being our longest-running war.
the theory is kind of
panning out.
I don't see
how this war can be won.
A bombshell series
of investigative reports
in The Washington Post
exposing heartbreaking truths
about the U.S. war
in Afghanistan.
which has claimed
some 2.400 U.S. lives
and cost nearly
a trillion dollars.
[Whitlock]
The first thing we did.
the first story
was just to show
that disconnect between what
they were saying in public
and what they were
saying privately.
but then.
as you pointed out.
we-we focus
on certain themes.
certain core failings
of the war.
That's the gist
of-of the series.
A new report claims
that the American people
were misled
about the War in Afghanistan.
A Washington Post  investigation
looked at nearly 2.000 pages
of internal
government documents
and found that senior
U.S. officials
did not tell the truth.
[Fallis]
"Built to Fail.
Despite vows the U.S. wouldn't
get mired in nation building.
it has wasted billions
doing just that."
Uh. "Consumed by Corruption.
The U.S. flooded the country
with money
and then turned a blind eye
to the graft it fueled."
"Unguarded Nation.
Afghan security forces.
despite years of training.
were dogged by incompetence
and corruption."
And the last day. uh.
"Overwhelmed by Opium.
The U.S. war on drugs
in Afghanistan
has imploded
at nearly every turn."
[Whitlock] I think the main
headline is that. you know.
for 18 years.
U.S. government. generals.
ambassadors. diplomats
were giving
rosy pronouncements
about the War in Afghanistan.
even though they knew the war
was not going well
or it was failing
or that they had profound
doubts about the strategy.
So. in public.
they were saying one thing
about how they were
making progress
and this was
a war worth fighting.
In private.
they admitted they had no idea
what they were doing.
[man] "We didn't know
what we were doing."
said now-retired Lieutenant
General Douglas Lute.
who was the Afghan war czar
for Presidents Bush and Obama.
I can't think of another war
where you have the generals
in charge of it
admitting that their strategy
was fatally flawed.
and to say that
in such raw terms.
it's not just news.
it's-it's history.
[man] We simply didn't know
what we were doing.
It wasn't even mission creep.
It was mission fantasy.
How do we ever believe in our
military people in the future?
I mean. it's like a spouse
who's been cheated on.
How do I ever
trust you again?
In a country increasingly
divided every day.
it's nice to learn
that there's one issue
that brings America's leaders
together--
lying about war.
♪ dramatic music ♪
♪♪♪
[Whitlock]
I think the American public
has always wanted
to support the war.
They wanted to support
the troops here.
This is very different
from Iraq or other conflicts
around the world. and--
but over time.
it's become clear. I think.
to the American people
that this wasn't working out
as intended.
It took years and years
much longer than they thought.
and they've heard three
presidents talk about this.
And they knew it didn't add up.
♪♪♪
[Gossman] Building schools
and protecting women's rights
and so on. that's not
what this war is about.
Those have always
been secondary
to the primary objective.
which has been
to hunt Taliban and al-Qaeda.
The secret detentions.
the torture.
ceaseless night raids.
air strikes. drone attacks.
when I said it's a CIA war.
meaning they've sort of set
the priorities for the war.
and for the Afghans.
this is a never-ending war.
and many of them
have seen nothing but.
♪♪♪
The U.S. and the Taliban
have just signed
a landmark agreement
that could finally lead
to an end of hostilities
in Afghanistan.
After two decades of war.
the U.S. and the Afghan Taliban
have just signed
a long-awaited deal
aimed at paving the way
to peace
and the departure
of foreign troops.
[man]
Not part of the deal?
Any commitments
from the Taliban
to protect the civil rights
of people
they so brutally repressed
when last in power.
particularly women.
[Saleh] Afghanistan
has suffered for 40 years.
so it's very hard to see
how this country
is going to be able
to pull together.
The coming days and months
are going to decide
whether peace in Afghanistan
is going to move
from a signed document
to reality on the ground.
I really believe the Taliban
wants to do something to show
that we're not
all wasting time.
If bad things happen.
we'll go back.
♪♪♪
[Maddox] Meeting with Afghans.
you can tell
they've lost faith in their
American counterparts
because of the historical
flip-flopping
and pulling back
and pushing back into areas.
and you can see in their eyes
the weariness and frustration.
'cause it's their country.
It's their families.
and it's their people.
and we come and go...
and that hurts.
After the attack.
I went to the United States.
My medical treatment
was sponsored
by a hospital in Dallas.
I spent six months
in the hospital.
and many people told me
to stay there in the U.S..
but I really wanted
to graduate.
and also. I wanted
to come back to Afghanistan.
I don't know.
but I wanted to come back.
[Qasemi]
I don't hate those people
who attacked my university.
because one day.
with the education I receive.
I want to bring a change that
will affect their children.
[Musazai] Educated people
are leaving the country
because of insecurity.
but if everybody leaves.
who will do something
for the country?
[applause]
We cannot just depend
on the United States
for peace.
So I think I have the
responsibility to work for it.
because this is the time.
The country is in need.
[Mohseni] Afghanistan
is the youngest country
outside of Africa.
median age of 18.
I think 60 percent
of the population
is under the age of 20.
so there's certainly
this appetite.
this capacity
to embrace change.
[indistinct chatter]
♪♪♪
You know. in life.
you get one shot
at doing something
that is impactful.
Whether we're successful or not
is another story.
but we-we've tried.
♪♪♪
buwee' ted
♪♪